#Making Small, Sustainable Income

##tl;dr;

_These tips are for the one-man/two-man/three-man shops. If you have a
team of people, then these things may not be applicable to you (in
fact the revenue generated by following this advice may not be even worth it)._

_When all is said and done. If you can make $10 a month on your game,
you're doing pretty well (that can scale quite nicely if you make many
quality games). It's pretty bleak/worst case, but I'd rather you go into
mobile game development with very conservative expectations for pay
out. There are few techniques in increasing sales, like creating a
"sandbox app" and having interstitials, but getting your game noticed
(and generating revenue off of it) is an uphill battle. Build niche
games that you'd be proud to say you built._

##Know the Quality of Your Target Category

Decide on what two categories you want to deploy your game to. Done?

Alright, now for those categories, go to the top charts list and
download/buy the top 10 games (yes, buy premium games and download the
free ones).

And the important part. Download/buy the bottom 10 games for that
category. Scroll all the way down to spot number #150 (some have fewer).

What this will give you is a bar for what the most downloaded apps in
a category look like, and what the standard deviation of quality
is. It's important to download both paid and free apps so you can get
a feel for what drives people to each side of the coin.

Here is a very sobering example. There is a game in the Music category
called _Okay?_ (built by the guy who made _Sometimes you Die_). It's a
wonderful game. But it's ranked lower than _Frozen Princess Run 3D
Infinite Runner Game Kids_ (which was ranked #33 at the time of
writing). Why? Because parents don't want to pay for a legitimate
Frozen game built by Disney. So they download this. App number #150
is _3D Fashion Girl Mall Runner Race Game By Awesome_ (which is a
reskinned version of the Frozen game).

Sadly, the number of downloads a game gets (and by extension, its
rank) isn't directly related to its quality (it certainly helps if
your game has some though). That being said, this should give you some
hope that the game you build could potentially dominate. It's one of
the few things that keeps me trying to make A Noble Circle the best
premium Music game, and why I'll eventually dominate the Go game
market with Beautiful Go (more on this later).

##Know Your Target Download Numbers

_3D Fashion Girl Mall Runner Race Game By Awesome_ employs
a frowned upon tactic of "if you give me a 5 star review I will give
you a cool unlock"... so naturally it has a very high review
conversion rate. The total number of reviews the game has is 842.
If you find a game that has a solid "ask for review strategy", you can
use that number to figure out how many downloads you can expect from the
lifetime of your own game.

Max downloads formula: number of reviews * 150
Min downloads formula: number of reviews * 50

This is based on what I've observed with my own games. Here are the
results for applying the formula.

###Projected vs Actual

A Dark Room review count: 27,745

- Projected max downloads (27k * 150): 4.5 million
- Projected min downloads (27k * 50): 1.3 million
- Actual downloads world wide: 2.48 million

The Ensign review count: 844

- Projected max downloads (844 * 150): 126,600
- Projected min downloads (844 * 50): 42,200
- Actual downloads world wide: 131,000

A Noble Circle - Prologue: 177

- Projected max downloads (177 * 150): 26,550
- Projected min downloads (177 * 150): 8,850
- Actual downloads world wide: 11,500

I want to include the results for A Noble Circle. But this game has an
abnormally high review conversion rate. Usually review conversion
rates are abysmal. It hovers around 0.5% to 3% (which is why the
download multiplier is so high).

A Noble Circle review count: 1,238<br/>

- Projected max downloads: 180,000
- Projected min downloads: 61,900
- Actual downloads world wide: 24,000

###Applying the Formula

So now that we know "the review formula", let's take a look at
_3D Fashion Girl Mall Runner Game By Awesome_ and _Frozen Princess Run
3D Infinite Runner Game for Kids_.

Fashion Girl review count: 842

- Projected max downloads (842 * 150): 126,300
- Projected min downloads (842 * 50): 42,100

Frozen Princess review count: 2,088

- Projected max downloads (842 * 150): 313,200
- Projected min downloads (842 * 50): 104,400

For these two apps, I'd guess the actual download numbers are closer
to the lower one. Both these games probably have high review
conversion rates because of their sleazy tactics for getting reviews.

A note to the developer of these two games: Apple will take your
apps down if you get caught doing this bullshit. You and I both know
that devs have no idea if the customer actually did the review (nor
what rating it was given). You're misleading people by doing this and
artificially inflating your rating.

###An Example of How I'm Using It

As I mentioned earlier, I'm working on a smaller game: Beautiful Go.
Let's apply this thought process to my target game type and see how
financially viable it is to _go_ after the game of Go market (pun intended).

1. I found a variety Go Games: SmartGo Player (515 reviews);
   Tsumego Pro (56 reviews); Light GO 13x (191 reviews);

2. These apps have been around for a while, so their review numbers
   probably won't increase substantially. I took Tsumego Pro as my low
   end (2,800 downloads), and SmartGo as my top end (77,250). Given
   that these apps have been around since 2012, my revenue can
   be anywhere from $700 to $20,000 annually (total projected
   downloads divided by number of years in App Store, at $0.99 per
   download).

3. Given this info, I decided to give a "virtual Go board" a shot
   (I was coming off of a inspiration-high after watching Ikari No
   Go). I built the first version of Beautiful Go in a weekend. And
   then iterated on it a couple of times (taking in feedback from Go
   subreddits and forums). My lifetime revenue for Beautiful Go is
   sitting at $546 (it's been in the App Store for year so far).

4. Hey, not bad. Now I can continue to build variations of this type
   of "virtual boards": Mancala, Reversi, Chess, Xianqi, Checkers,
   etc. Suddenly I have a 5x increase in revenue given these variants.

5. I can then place interstitials between these variants to increase
   revenue across the board... I should probably do this at some
   point... right after I figure out how to clone myself.

##Niche Apps

Build niche apps. As a small time developer (one, maybe two
people), making $10 a month on an app really is great (that's almost a
Netflix subscription). You'll have a much easier time finding people
to buy/download your game if it targets a very specific audience.

For example. A Dark Room is a text based RPG. The Ensign is a "Dark
Souls difficult" ASCII rouge like. A Noble Circle is based off of a
book written in the 1800's. Beautiful Go is for a small group of
people studying Go strategies. All my future games are these
ridiculously niche areas.

Look, what has a better chance of being discovered and downloaded for
$0.99? On of the thousands of Flappy Bird clone, or a game about the
350 year war between the Netherlands and the Isle of Scilly? There are
over 70 million iPhones out there. There has to be at least 10 people
per month looking for a game about some niche genre/experience
(especially since you've felt it was cool enough to build it). So
concentrate on those small communities.

Once you've built your Under Water Basket Weaving game, go to forums,
subreddits, meetups, and drum up visibility. You can set your app
keywords to focus in on these niche "seo words" too. Take advantage of
this beautiful virtually small world we live in. Ask for feedback. Be
_known_ in these communities and they'll support you.

###Baby Steps

Alright so I hope I've given you some food for thought. Here is a list
of steps to take when building your awesome game.

1. Decide on a unique niche game.
2. Search for similar apps and decide on your category (you can put
   your app in two categories), download the top 10 free/premium apps and
   bottom 10 free/pre apps to see what people are downloading.
3. Calculate the revenue potential for your super awesome niche game
   using that silly review formula. Determine if it's worth building.
4. Build something playable fast (have something in the App Store in
   six weeks). Get something out there dammit. Don't worry, you're a
   nobody and no one will download your app anyways. Hell, release it
   for free for now. Just to see if people will download it.
5. Keep iterating on the app, find niche communities and let them know
   that the app exists. Give away promotion codes (for premium apps or IAP)
   like candy and ask for feedback.
6. Make $10 a month. Play around with pricing, IAP (bleh), and ads
   (bleh). Because it's a niche app, you can potentially charge more
   for it. Beautiful Go sells for $1.99, after the next update, I'll
   bring that price up to $2.99 and probably won't see downloads drop.
7. Once you hit the $10 mark. Build another app. Following the same
   steps. Cross promote between your offerings. Keep doing this and
   hopefully you'll build one that does better than the others.
8. Once you've got a little gem that's a bit brighter than the others,
   consider pitching the app to Apple for a minor feature.
9. Are you making enough to cover your daily coffee? Lunch? Monthly car
   payment? Awesome! Cause that's probably about as good as it
   realistically gets.
10. If you become popular, consider creating a "playground app" for
    yourself where you can try out different ideas, and get feedback
    from people who are following you as developer (I'm doing this
    next and will report back with results).
